IX.
THE PAUNS.
Sometimes, having a surfeit of human society and gossip, and worn out all my village friends,
I rambled still farther westward than I habitually dwell, into yet more unfrequented parts of
the town, to fresh woods and pastures new, or, while the sun was setting, made my supper
of huckleberries and blueberries on Fair Haven Hill, and laid up a store for several days.
The fruits do not yield their true flavor to the purchaser of them, nor to him who raises
them for the market. There is but one way to obtain it, yet few take that way. If you
the flavor of huckleberries, ask the cowboy or the partridge, it is a vulgar error to
suppose that you have tasted huckleberries who never plucked them. A huckleberry never
reaches Boston. They have not been known there since they grew on her three hills. The ambrosial
and essential part of the fruit is lost, with the bloom which is rubbed off in the market
cart, or they become mere provender. As long as eternal justice reigns, not one innocent
huckleberry can be transported thither from the country's hills.
Occasionally, after my hoeing was done for the day, I joined some impatient companion
who had been fishing on the pond since morning, as silent and motionless as a duck or a floating
leaf, and after practicing various kinds of philosophy, had concluded commonly by the
time I arrived that he belonged to the ancient sect of Cenobites. There was one older man,
an excellent fisher and skilled in all kinds of woodcraft, who was pleased to look upon
my house as a building erected for the convenience of fishermen, and I was equally pleased when
he sat in my doorway to arrange his lines. He at one end of the boat and I at the other,
but not many words passed between us, for he had grown deaf in his later years, but
he occasionally hummed a psalm, which harmonized well enough with my philosophy.
Our intercourse was thus altogether one of unbroken harmony, far more pleasing to remember
than if it had been carried on by speech. When, as was commonly the case, I had none
to commune with, I used to raise the echoes by striking with a paddle on the side of my
boat, filling the surrounding woods with circling and dilating sounds, stirring them up as the
deeper of a menagerie his wild beasts, until I elicited a growl from every wooded vale
and hillside. In warm evenings I frequently sat in the boat playing the flute, and saw
the perch, which I seemed to have charmed, hovering around me, and the moon, traveling
over the ribbed bottom, which was strewed with the wrecks of the forest. Formally I
had come to this pond adventurously from time to time, in dark summer nights, with
a companion, and making a fire close to the water's edge, which we thought attracted
the fishes. We caught pouts with a bunch of worms strung on a thread, and when we had
done far in the night, threw the burning brands high into the air like sky-rockets, which,
coming down into the pond, were quenched with a loud hissing, and we were suddenly groping
in total darkness. Through this whistling a tune we took our way to the haunts of men
again, but now I had made my home by the shore.
Sometimes after staying in a village parlor till the family had all retired, I have returned
to the woods, and partly, with a view to the next day's dinner, spent the hours of
midnight fishing from a boat by moonlight, serenaded by owls and foxes, and hearing from
time to time the creaking note of some unknown bird close at hand. These experiences were
very memorable and valuable to me. Anchored in forty feet of water, and twenty or thirty
rods from the shore, surrounded sometimes by thousands of small perch and shiners, dimpling
the surface with their tails in the moonlight, and communicating by a long flaxen line with
mysterious nocturnal fishes, which had their dwelling forty feet below, or sometimes dragging
sixty feet of line about the pond as I drifted in the gentle night breeze. Now and then feeling
a slight vibration along it, indicative of some life prowling about its extremity, of
dull, uncertain, blundering purpose there, and slow to make up its mind. At length you
slowly raise, pulling hand over hand, some horned pout, squeaking and squirming to the
especially in dark nights, when your thoughts had wandered to vast and cosmogonal themes
in other spheres, to feel this faint jerk which came to interrupt your dreams and link
you to nature again. It seemed as if I might next cast my line upward into the air, as
well as downward into this element, which was scarcely more dense. Thus I caught two
fishes, as it were, with one hook. The scenery of Walden is on a humble scale, and though
very beautiful, does not approach to grandeur, nor can it much concern one who has not long
or lived by its shore, yet this pond is so remarkable for its depth and purity as to
merit a particular description. It is a clear and deep green well, half a mile long and
a mile and three quarters in circumference, and contains about sixty-one and a half acres,
a perennial spring in the midst of pine and oak woods, without any visible inlet or outlet
except by the clouds and evaporation. The surrounding hills rise abruptly from the water
to the height of forty to eighty feet, though on the southeast and east they attain to about
one hundred and one hundred and fifty feet respectively, within a quarter and a third
of a mile. They are exclusively woodland. All our Concord waters have two colors at
least, one when viewed at a distance and another more proper close at hand. The hearse depends
more on the light and follows the sky. In clear weather in summer they appear blue at
a little distance, especially if agitated, and at a great distance all appear alike.
In stormy weather they are sometimes a dark slate color. The sea, however, is said to
be blue one day and green another without any perceptible change in the atmosphere.
I have seen our river when, the landscape being covered with snow, both water and ice
were almost as green as grass. Some consider blue to be the color of pure water, whether
liquid or solid. But looking directly down into our waters from a boat they are seen
to be of very different colors. Walden is blue at one time and green at another, even
the same point of view. Lying between the earth and the heavens it partakes of the color
of both. Viewed from a hilltop it reflects the color of the sky, but near at hand it
is of a yellowish tint, next the shore where you can see the sand, then a light green,
which gradually deepens to a uniform dark green in the body of the pond. In some lights,
viewed even from a hilltop, it is of a vivid green next to the shore. Some have referred
this to the reflection of the verger, but it is equally green there against the railroad
sand bank and in the spring before the leaves are expanded, and it may be simply the result
of the prevailing blue mixed with the yellow of the sand, such is the color of its iris.
This is that portion also where in the spring the ice being warmed by the heat of the sun,
reflected from the bottom and also transmitted through the earth, melts first and forms a
canal about the still frozen middle. Like the rest of our waters, when much agitated,
in clear weather, so that the surface of the waves may reflect the sky at the right angle,
or because there is more light mixed with it, it appears at a little distance of a darker
blue than the sky itself. And at such a time, being on its surface and looking with divided
vision, so as to see the reflection, I have discerned a matchless and indescribable light
blue, such as watered or changeable silks and sword blades suggest, more cerulean than
the sky itself, alternating with the original dark green on the opposite sides of the waves,
which last appeared but muddy in comparison. It is a vitreous greenish blue, as I remember
it, like those patches of the winter sky seen through cloud vistas in the west before sundown.
Yet a single glass of its water held up to the light is as colorless as an equal quantity
of air. It is well known that a large plate of glass will have a green tint, owing, as
the makers say, to its body, but a small piece of the same will be colorless. How large a
body of Walden water would be required to reflect a green tint I have never proved.
The water of our river is black, or a very dark brown to one looking directly down on
it, and, like that of most ponds, imparts to the body of one bathing in it a yellowish
tinge. But this water is of such crystalline purity that the body of the bather appears
of an alabaster whiteness, still more unnatural, which, as the limbs are magnified and distorted
withal, produces a monstrous effect, making fit studies for a Michelangelo.
The water is so transparent that the bottom can easily be discerned at the depth of twenty-five
or thirty feet. Paddling over it you may see, many feet beneath the surface, the schools
of perch and shiners, perhaps only an inch long, yet the form are easily distinguished
by their transverse bars, and you think that they must be ascetic fish that find a subsistence
there. Once, in the winter, many years ago, when I had been cutting holes through the
ice in order to catch pickerel, as I stepped ashore I tossed my axe back on to the ice,
but, as if some evil genius had directed it, it slid four or five rods directly into one
of the holes, where the water was twenty-five feet deep.
Out of curiosity I laid down on the ice, and looked through the hole, until I saw the axe
a little on one side standing on its head, with its helm erect and gently swaying to
and fro with the pulse of the pond, and there it might have stood erect and swaying till
in the course of time the handle rotted off, if I had not disturbed it. Making another
hole directly over it, with an ice-chisel which I had, and cutting down the longest
birch which I could find in the neighborhood with my knife, I made a slip-noose which I
attached to its end, and letting it down carefully, passed it over the knob of the handle and
drew it by a line along the birch, and so pulled the axe out again. The shore is composed
of a belt of smooth, rounded white stones, like paving stones, except one or two short
sand beaches, and is so steep that in many places a single leap will carry you into water
over your head. And were it not for its remarkable transparency, that would be the last to be
seen of its bottom till it rose on the opposite side. Some think it is bottomless, it is nowhere
muddy, and a casual observer would say that there were no weeds at all in it, and of noticeable
plants, except in the little meadows recently overflowed which do not properly belong to
it, a closer scrutiny does not detect a flag, nor a bulrush, nor even a lily, yellow or
white, but only a few small heart-leaves and pottomogetons, and perhaps a water target
or two, all which, however, a bather might not perceive, and these plants are clean and
bright like the element they grow in. The stones extend a rod or two into the water,
and then the bottom is pure sand, except in the deepest part, where there is usually a
little sediment, probably from the decay of the leaves which have been wafted on to it,
so many successive falls, and a bright green weed is brought up on anchors even in midwinter.
We have one other pond just like this, White Pond, in Nine Acre Corner, about two and a
half miles westerly, but, though I am acquainted with most of the ponds within a dozen miles
of this centre, I do not know a third of this pure and well-like character. Successive nations
perchance have drank at, admired, and fathomed it, and passed away, and still its water is
green and pollucid as ever. Not an intermitting spring.
Perhaps on that spring morning when Adam and Eve were driven out of Eden, Walden Pond was
already in existence, and even then breaking up in a gentle spring rain accompanied with
mist and a southerly wind, and covered with myriads of ducks and geese which had not heard
of the fall, when still such pure lakes sufficed them. Even then it had commenced to rise and
fall, and had clarified its waters, and coloured them of the hue they now wear, and obtained
a patent of heaven to be the only Walden Pond in the world, and distiller of celestial dews.
Who knows in how many unremembered nations' literatures this has been the Castilian Fountain,
or what nymphs presided over it in the Golden Age. It is a gem of the first water which
Concord wears in her coronet. Yet, perchance, the first who came to this well have left
some trace of their footsteps. I have been surprised to detect, in circling the pond,
even where a thick wood has just been cut down on the shore, a narrow shelf-like path
in the steep hillside, alternately rising and falling, approaching and receding from
the water's edge, as old probably as the race of man here, worn by the feet of aboriginal
hunters, and still from time to time unwittingly trodden by the present occupants of the land.
This is particularly distinct to one standing on the middle of the pond in winter, just
after a light snow has fallen, appearing as a clear undulating white line, unobscured
by weeds and twigs, and very obvious a quarter of a mile off in many places where in summer
it is hardly distinguishable close at hand. The snow reprints it, as it were, in clear
white type alto relivo. The ornamented grounds of villas which will one day be built here
may still preserve some trace of this. The pond rises and falls, but whether regularly
or not, and within what period, nobody knows, though as usual many pretend to know, it is
commonly higher in winter and lower in the summer, though not corresponding to the general
wet and dryness. I can remember when it was a foot or two lower, and also when it was
at least five feet higher, than when I lived by it. There is a narrow sand bar running
into it, with very deep water on one side, on which I helped boil a kettle of chowder,
some six rods from the main shore, about the year 1824, which it has not been possible
to do for twenty-five years. And, on the other hand, my friends used to listen with incredulity
when I told them that a few years later I was accustomed to fish from a boat in a secluded
cove in the woods, fifteen rods from the only shore they knew, which place was long since
converted into a meadow. But the pond has risen steadily for two years, and now, in
the summer of 52, is just five feet higher than when I lived there, or as high as it
was thirty years ago, and fishing goes on again in the meadow. This makes a difference
of level at the outside of six or seven feet, and yet the watershed by the surrounding hills
is insignificant in amount, and this overflow must be referred to causes which affect the
deep springs.
This same summer the pond has begun to fall again. It is remarkable that this fluctuation,
whether periodical or not, appears thus to require many years for its accomplishment.
I have observed one rise and a part of two falls, and I expect that a dozen or fifteen
years hence the water will again be as low as I have ever known it.
Flint's pond a mile eastward, allowing for the disturbance occasioned by its inlets and
outlets and the smaller intermediate ponds also, sympathize with Walden, and recently
attained their greatest height at the same time with the latter. The same is true as
far as my observation goes of White Pond.
This rise and fall of Walden at long intervals serves this use at least. The water standing
at this great height for a year or more, though it makes it difficult to walk round it, kills
the shrubs and trees which have sprung up about its edge since the last rise. Pitch
pines, birches, alders, aspens, and others, and falling again leaves an unobstructed shore,
for unlike many ponds, and all waters which are subject to a daily tide, its shore is
cleanest when the water is lowest.
On the side of the pond, next my house, a row of pitch pines fifteen feet high has been
killed and tipped over as if by a lever, and thus a stop put to their encroachments,
and their size indicates how many years have elapsed since the last rise to this height.
By this fluctuation the pond asserts its title to a shore, and thus the shore is shorn,
and the trees cannot hold it by right of possession. These are the lips of the lake on which no
beard grows. It licks its chaps from time to time. When the weather is at its height
the alders, willows, and maples send forth a mass of fibrous red roots, several feet
long from all sides of their stems in the water, and to the height of three or four
feet from the ground, in the effort to maintain themselves. And I have known the high blueberry
bushes about the shore, which commonly produce no fruit, bear an abundant crop under these
circumstances. Some have been puzzled to tell how the shore became so regularly paved.
My townsmen have all heard the tradition, the oldest people tell me that they heard
it in their youth, that anciently the Indians were holding a powwow upon a hill here, which
rose as high into the heavens as the pond now sinks deep into the earth. And they used
much profanity, as the story goes, though this vice is one of which the Indians were
never guilty, and while they were thus engaged the hill shook and suddenly sank, and only
one old squaw, named Walden, escaped, and from her the pond was named. It has been conjectured
that when the hill shook these stones rolled down its side and became the present shore.
It is very certain, at any rate, that once there was no pond here, and now there is one,
and this Indian fable does not in any respect conflict with the account of the ancient settler,
whom I have mentioned, who remembers so well when he first came here with his divining
rod, saw a thin vapor rising from the sward, and the hazel pointed steadily downward, and
he concluded to dig a well here. As for the stones, many still think that they are hardly
to be accounted for by the action of the waves on these hills, but I observe that the surrounding
hills are remarkably full of the same kind of stones, so that they have been obliged
to pile them up in walls on both sides of the railroad cut nearest the pond, and moreover
there are more stones where the shore is most abrupt, so that unfortunately it is no longer
a mystery to me. I detect the paver. If the name was not derived from that of some English
locality, Safran Walden, for instance, one might suppose that it was called originally
Walled Inn Pond. The pond was my well, ready dug. For four months in the year its water
is as cold as it is pure at all times, and I think that it is then as good as any if
not the best in the town. In the winter all water which is exposed to the air is colder
than springs and wells which are protected from it. The temperature of the pond water,
which had stood in the room where I sat from five o'clock in the afternoon till noon the
next day, the sixth of March, 1846, the thermometer having been up to 65 or 70 degrees some of
the time, owing partly to the sun on the roof, was 42 degrees, or one degree colder
than the water of one of the coldest wells in the village just drawn.
The temperature of the boiling spring the same day was 45 degrees, or the warmest of
any water tried, though it is the coldest that I know of in summer, when beside shallow
stagnant surface water is not mingled with it. Moreover, in summer Walden never becomes
so warm as most water which is exposed to the sun on account of its depth. In the warmest
weather I usually placed a pailful in my cellar where it became cool in the night and remained
so during the day, though I also resorted to a spring in the neighborhood. It was as
good when a week old as the day it was dipped and had no taste of the pump.
Whoever camps for a week in summer by the shore of a pond needs only bury a pail of
water a few feet deep in the shade of his camp to be independent of the luxury of ice.
There have been caught in Walden pickerel, one weighing seven pounds. To say nothing
of another which carried off a reel with great velocity, which the fisherman safely
set down at eight pounds because he did not see him. Perch and pouts, some of each weighing
over two pounds, shiners, chivins or roach, a very few breams, and a couple of eels, one
weighing four pounds. I am thus particular because the weight of a fish is commonly its
only title to fame, and these are the only eels I have heard of here. Also I have a faint
recollection of a little fish some five inches long, with silvery sides and a greenish back,
somewhat dais-like in its character, which I mention here chiefly to link my facts to
fable.
Nevertheless, this pond is not very fertile in fish. Its pickerel, though not abundant,
are its chief boast. I have seen at one time, lying on the ice, pickerel of at least three
different kinds, a long and shallow one, steel-colored, most like those caught in the river, a bright
common here, and another golden-colored and shaped like the last, but peppered on the
sides with small dark brown or black spots intermixed with a few faint blood-red ones,
very much like a trout. The specific name reticulatus would not apply to this. It should
be guttatus, rather. These are all very firm fish, and way more than their size promises.
The shiners, pouts, and perch also, and indeed all the fishes which inhabit this pond, are
much cleaner, handsomer, and firmer-fleshed than those in the river, and most other ponds,
as the water is purer, and they can easily be distinguished from them. Probably many
ichthyologists would make new varieties of some of them. There are also a certain race
of frogs and tortoises, and a few mussels in it. Muskrats and mink leave their traces
about it, and occasionally a travelling mud-turtle visits it. Sometimes, when I pushed off my
boat in the morning, I disturbed a great mud-turtle which had secreted himself under the boat
in the night. Ducks and geese frequent it in the spring and fall, the white-bellied
swallows, hereundo bicolor, skim over it, and the peat-wheats, Totanus macularius, which
is the name of this species, teeter along its stony shores all summer. I have sometimes
disturbed a fish-hawk sitting on a white pine over the water, but I doubt if it is ever
profaned by the wind of a gull, like Fairhaven. At most it tolerates one annual loon. These
are all the animals of consequence which frequent it now.
You may see from a boat, in calm weather, near the sandy eastern shore, where the water
is eight or ten feet deep, and also in some other parts of the pond, some circular heaps
half a dozen feet in diameter, by a foot in height, consisting of small stones less than
in size, where all around is bare sand. At first you wonder if the Indians could have
formed them on the ice for any purpose, and so when the ice melted they sank to the bottom,
but they are too regular and some of them plainly too fresh for that. They are similar
to those found in rivers, but as there are no suckers nor lampreys here, I know not by
what fish they could be made. Perhaps they are the nests of the chiven. These lend a
pleasing mystery to the bottom.
The shore is irregular enough not to be monotonous. I have in my mind's eye the western, indented
with deep bays, the bolder northern, and the beautifully scalloped southern shore, where
men suggest unexplored coves between. The forest was never so good a setting, nor is
so distinctly beautiful, as when seen from the middle of a small lake, amid hills which
rise from the water's edge. For the water in which it is reflected not only makes the
best foreground in such a case, but with its winding shore the most natural and agreeable
boundary to it. There is no rawness nor imperfection in its edge there, as where the axe has cleared
apart or a cultivated field abuts on it. The trees have ample room to expand on the water
side, and each sends forth its most vigorous branch in that direction. There nature has
just gradations from the low shrubs of the shore to the highest trees. There are few
traces of man's hand to be seen. The water laves the shore as it did a thousand years
ago.
A lake is the landscape's most beautiful and expressive feature. It is earth's eye, looking
into which the beholder measures the depth of his own nature. The fluvia-tiled trees
next the shore are the slender eyelashes which fringe it, and the wooded hills and cliffs
around it are its overhanging brows. Standing on the smooth sandy beach at the east end
of the pond in a calm September afternoon, when a slight haze makes the opposite shoreline
indistinct, I have seen whence came the expression the glassy surface of a lake. When you invert
your head it looks like a thread of finest gossamer stretched across the valley, and
creating one stratum of the atmosphere from another. You would think that you could walk
dry under it to the opposing hills, and that the swallows which skim over might perch on
it. Indeed, they sometimes dive below this line as if it were by mistake, and are undeceived.
As you look over the pond westward you are obliged to employ both your hands to defend
your eyes against the reflected as well as the true sun, for they are equally bright.
And if between the two you survey its surface critically, it is literally as smooth as glass,
except where the skater insects at equal intervals scatter over its whole extent, by their motions
in the sun produce the finest imaginable sparkle on it. Or, perchance, a duck plumes itself,
or as I have said, a swallow skims so low as to touch it.
It may be that in the distance a fish describes an arc of three or four feet in the air, and
there is one bright flash where it emerges, and another where it strikes the water. Sometimes
the whole silvery arc is revealed, or here and there, perhaps, is a thistle down floating
on its surface, which the fishes dart at, and so dimple it again. It is like molten
glass, cooled, but not congealed, and the few motes in it are pure and beautiful like
the imperfections in glass. You may often detect a yet smoother and darker water, separated
from the rest, as if by an invisible cobweb, boom of the water nymphs resting on it. From
a hilltop you can see a fish leap in almost any part, for not a pickerel or shiner picks
an insect from this smooth surface, but it manifestly disturbs the equilibrium of the
what elaborateness this simple fact is advertised. This piscine murder will out, and from my
distant perch I distinguish the circling undulations, when they are half a dozen rods in diameter.
You can even detect a water bug, Gyrannus, ceaselessly progressing over the smooth surface
a quarter of a mile off, for they furrow the water slightly, making a conspicuous ripple
bounded by two diverging lines, but the skaters glide over it without rippling it perceptibly.
When the surface is considerably agitated there are no skaters nor water bugs on it,
but apparently, in calm days, they leave their havens and adventurously glide forth from
the shore by short impulses till they completely cover it. It is a soothing employment on one
of those fine days in the fall, when all the warmth of the sun is fully appreciated, to
sit on a stump on such a height as this, overlooking the pond, and study the dimpling circles,
which are incessantly inscribed on its otherwise invisible surface, amid the reflected skies
and trees. Over this great expanse there is no disturbance, but it is thus at once gently
smoothed away and assaged, as when a vase of water is jarred the trembling circles seek
the shore and all is smooth again. Not a fish can leap or an insect fall on the pond, but
it is thus reported in circling dimples, in lines of beauty, as it were the constant welling
up of its fountain, the gentle pulsing of its life, the heaving of its breast. The thrills
of joy and thrills of pain are indistinguishable. How peaceful the phenomena of the lake! Again
the works of man shine as in the spring.
Ay, every leaf and twig and stone and cobweb sparkles now at mid-afternoon, as when covered
with dew in a spring morning. Every motion of an oar or an insect produces a flash of
light, and if an oar falls, how sweet the echo!
In such a day, in September or October, Walden is a perfect forest mirror, set round with
stones as precious to my eye as if fewer or rarer. Nothing so fair, so pure, and at the
same time so large as a lake, perchance, lies on the surface of the earth. Sky, water, and
water. It needs no fence. Nations come and go without defiling it. It is a mirror which
no stone can crack, whose quick silver will never wear off, whose gilding nature continually
repairs. No storms, no dust can dim its surface ever fresh. A mirror in which all impurity
presented to it sinks, swept and dusted by the sun's hazy brush. This, the light dust
cloth, which retains no breath that has breathed on it, but sends its own to float as clouds
high above its surface and be reflected in its bosom still. A field of water betrays
the spirit that is in the air. It is continually receiving new life and motion from above.
It is intermediate in its nature between land and sky. On land only the grass and trees
wave, but the water itself is rippled by the wind. I see where the breeze dashes across
it by the streaks or flakes of light. It is remarkable that we can look down on its surface.
We shall, perhaps, look down thus on the surface of air at length, and mark where a still subtler
spirit sweeps over it. The skaters and water bugs finally disappear in the latter part
of October, when the severe frosts have come. And then, and in November, usually in a calm
day, there is absolutely nothing to ripple the surface.
One November afternoon, in the calm at the end of a rainstorm of several days' duration,
when the sky was still completely overcast and the air was full of mist, I observed that
the pond was remarkably smooth, so that it was difficult to distinguish its surface,
though it no longer reflected the bright tints of October, but the somber November colors
of the surrounding hills. Though I passed over it as gently as possible,
the slight undulations produced by my boat extended almost as far as I could see.
And gave a ribbed appearance to the reflections. But, as I was looking over the surface, I
saw here and there at a distance a faint glimmer, as if some skater insects which had escaped
the frosts might be collected there, or, perchance, the surface, being so smoothed, betrayed where
a spring welled up from the bottom, paddling gently to one of these places.
I was surprised to find myself surrounded by myriads of small perch, about five inches
long, of a rich bronze color in the green water, sporting there and constantly rising
to the surface and dimpling it, sometimes leaving bubbles on it.
In such transparent and seemingly bottomless water, reflecting the clouds, I seemed to
be floating through the air as in a balloon, and their swimming impressed me as a kind
of flight or hovering, as if they were a compact flock of birds passing just beneath my level
on the right or left. Their fins, like sails, set all around them.
There were many such schools in the pond, apparently improving the short season before
winter would draw an icy shutter over their broad skylight, sometimes giving to the surface
an appearance as if a slight breeze struck it, or a few raindrops fell there. When I
approached carelessly and alarmed them, they made a sudden splash and rippling with their
tails as if one had struck the water with a bushy bow, and instantly took refuge in
the depths.
At length the wind rose, the mist increased, and the waves began to run, and the plume
perch leaped much higher than before, half out of water, a hundred black points, three
inches long, at once above the surface.
Even as late as the fifth of December one year I saw some dimples on the surface and
thinking it was going to rain hard immediately, the air being full of mist. I made haste to
take my place at the oars and row homeward. Already the rain seemed rapidly increasing,
though I felt none on my cheek, and I anticipated a thorough soaking. But suddenly the dimples
ceased, for they were produced by the perch, which the noise of my oars had seared into
the depths, and I saw their schools dimly disappearing. So I spent a dry afternoon after
all.
An old man who used to frequent this pond nearly sixty years ago, when it was dark with
surrounding forests, tells me that in those days he sometimes saw it all alive with ducks
and other water fowl, and that there were many eagles about it. He came here fishing
and used an old log canoe which he found on the shore. It was made of two white pine logs
dug out and pinned together, and was cut off square at the ends. It was very clumsy,
but lasted a great many years before it became waterlogged and perhaps sank to the bottom.
He did not know whose it was. It belonged to the pond. He used to make a cable for his
anchor of strips of hickory bark tied together.
An old man, a potter who lived by the pond before the revolution, told him once that
there was an iron chest at the bottom, and that he had seen it. Sometimes it would come
floating up to the shore, but when you went toward it, it would go back into the deep
water and disappear.
I was pleased to hear of the old log canoe, which took the place of an Indian one of the
same material but more graceful construction, which perchance had first been a tree on the
bank, and then as it were fell into the water to float there for a generation, the most
proper vessel for the lake.
I remember that when I first looked into these depths there were many large trunks to be
seen indistinctly lying on the bottom, which had either been blown over formerly, or left
on the ice at the last cutting, when wood was cheaper, but now they have mostly disappeared.
When I first paddled a boat on Walden it was completely surrounded by thick and lofty pine
and oak woods, and in some of its coves grape vines had run over the trees next the water,
and formed bowers under which a boat could pass. The hills which form its shores are
so steep, and the woods on them then so high, that as you looked down from the west end
it had the appearance of an amphitheatre for some land of sylvan spectacle.
I have spent many an hour, when I was younger, floating over its surface as the Zephyr willed,
having paddled my boat to the middle, and lying on my back across the seats in a summer
forenoon, dreaming awake, until I was aroused by the boat touching the sand, and I arose
to see what shore my fates had impelled me to, days when idleness was the most attractive
and productive industry. Many a forenoon have I stolen away, preferring to spend thus the
most valued part of the day, for I was rich, if not in money, in sunny hours and summer
days, and spent them lavishly. Nor do I regret that I did not waste more of them in the workshop
or the teacher's desk, but since I left those shores the woodchoppers have still further
laid them waste, and now for many a year there will be no more rambling through the aisles
of the wood, with occasional vistas through which you see the water. My muse may be excused
if she is silent henceforth. How can you expect the birds to sing when their groves are cut
down? Now the trunks of trees on the bottom, and the old log canoe, and the dark surrounding
woods are gone, and the villagers, who scarcely know where it lies, instead of going to the
pond to bathe or drink, are thinking to bring its water, which should be as sacred as the
mangies at least, to the village in a pipe, to wash their dishes with, to earn their Walden
by the turning of a cock or the drawing of a plug. That devilish iron horse, whose ear
rending neigh is heard throughout the town, has muddied the boiling spring with his foot,
and here it is that has browsed off all the woods on Walden shore, that Trojan horse with
a thousand men in his belly, introduced by mercenary Greeks. Where is the country's champion,
the moor of Moor Hill, to meet him at the deep cut and thrust an avenging lance between
the ribs of the bloated pest? Nevertheless, of all the characters I have known, perhaps
Walden wears best, and best preserves its purity. Many men have been likened to it,
but few deserve that honor. Though the woodchoppers have laid bare first this shore and then that,
and the Irish have built their sties by it, and the railroad has infringed on its border,
and the ice-men have skimmed it once, it is itself unchanged. The same water which my
youthful eyes fell on, all the change is in me. It has not acquired one permanent wrinkle
after all its ripples. It is perennially young, and I may stand and see a swallow-dip apparently
to pick an insect from its surface as of yore. It struck me again tonight, as if I had not
seen it almost daily for more than twenty years. Why, here is Walden, the same woodchopper
woodland lake that I discovered so many years ago, where a forest was cut down last winter,
another is springing up by its shore as lustily as ever. The same thought is welling up to
its surface that was then. It is the same liquid joy and happiness to itself and its
maker, I, and it may be to me. It is the work of a brave man, surely, in whom there was
no guile. He rounded this water with his hand, deepened and clarified it in his thought,
and in his will bequeathed it to Concord. I see but one thing, and that is that the
water is filled by its face, that it is visited by the same reflection, and I can almost say,
Walden, is it you?
It is no dream of mine to ornament a line. I cannot come nearer to God and heaven than
I live to Walden even. I am its stony shore, and the breeze that passes o'er in the hollow
of my hand are its water and its sand, and its deepest resort lies high in my thought.
The cars never pause to look at it, yet I fancy that the engineers and firemen and brakemen
and those passengers who have a season ticket and see it often are better men for the sight.
The engineer does not forget at night, or his nature does not, that he has held this
vision of serenity and purity once at least during the day. Though seen but once, it helps
to wash out State Street and the engine's soot. One proposes that it be called God's
Drop.
I have said that Walden has no visible inlet nor outlet, but it is on the one hand the
distantly and indirectly related to Flint's Pond, which is more elevated, by a chain of
small ponds coming from that quarter, and on the other directly and manifestly to Concord
River, which is lower, by a similar chain of ponds, through which in some other geological
period it may have flowed, and by a little digging, which, God forbid, it can be made
to flow thither again. If by living thus reserved and austere like a hermit in the woods so
long it has acquired such wonderful purity, who would not regret that the comparatively
impure waters of Flint's Pond should be mingled with it, or itself should ever go to waste
its sweetness in the ocean's wave?
Flint's or Sandy Pond, in Lincoln, our greatest lake and inland sea, lies about a mile east
of Walden. It is much larger, being said to contain 197 acres, and is more fertile than
fish, but it is comparatively shallow and not remarkably pure. A walk through the woods
thither was often my recreation. It was worth the while, if only to feel the wind blow on
your cheeks freely, and see the waves run, and remember the life of mariners. I went
a chestnutting there in the fall on windy days, when the nuts were dropping into the
water and were washed to my feet, and one day as I crept along its sedgy shore the fresh
spray blowing in my face I came upon the moldering wreck of a boat, the sides gone, and hardly
more than the impression of its flat bottom left amid the rushes, yet its model was sharply
defined as if it were a large decayed pad with its veins. It was as impressive a wreck
as one could imagine on the seashore, and had as good a moral. It is by this time mere
vegetable mold and undistinguishable pond-shore, through which rushes and flags have pushed
up. I used to admire the ripple marks on the sandy bottom at the north end of this pond,
made firm and hard to the feet of the wader by the pressure of the water, and the rushes
which grew in Indian file in waving lines corresponding to these marks rank behind rank,
as if the waves had planted them. There also I have found in considerable quantities curious
balls composed apparently of fine grass or roots of pipewort perhaps, from half an inch
to four inches in diameter, and perfectly spherical. They wash back and forth in shallow
water on a sandy bottom, and are sometimes cast on the shore. They are either solid grass
or have a little sand in the middle. At first you would say that they were formed by the
action of the waves, like a pebble. Yet the smallest are made of equally coarse materials,
half an inch long, and they are produced only at one season of the year. Moreover, the waves,
I suspect, do not so much construct as wear down a material which has already acquired
consistency. They preserve their form when dry for an indefinite period.
Flint's Pond
Such is the poverty of our nomenclature. What right had the unclean and stupid farmer whose
shores he has ruthlessly laid bare to give his name to it? Some skin-flint who loved
better the reflecting surface of a dollar or a bright scent in which he could see his
own brazen face, who regarded even the wild ducks which settled in it as trespassers,
his fingers grown into crooked and bony talons from the long habit of grasping harpy-like
things? So it is not named for me. I go not there to see him nor to hear of him who never
saw it, who never bathed in it, who never loved it, who never protected it, who never
spoke a good word for it, nor thanked God that he had made it. Rather let it be named
from the fishes that swim in it, the wild fowl or quadrupeds which frequent it, the
wild flowers which grow by its shore, or some wild man or child the thread of whose history
is interwoven with its own, not for him who could show no title to it but the deed which
a like-minded neighbour or legislature gave him, him who thought only of its money value.
Whose presence perchance cursed all the shores, who exhausted the land around it and would
feign have exhausted the waters within it, who regretted only that it was not English
hay or cranberry meadow. There was nothing to redeem it forsooth in his eyes, and would
have drained and sold it for the mud at its bottom. It did not turn his mill, nor did
it, and it was no privilege to him to behold it. I respect not his labours, his farm where
everything has its price, who would carry the landscape, who would carry his God to
market if he could get anything for him, who goes to market for his God as it is, on whose
farm nothing grows free, whose fields bear no crops, whose meadows no flowers, whose
trees no fruits but dollars, who loves not the beauty of his fruits, whose fruits are
not ripe for him till they are turned to dollars. Give me the poverty that enjoys the people
true wealth. Farmers are respectable and interesting to me in proportion as they are poor, poor
farmers. A model farm where the house stands like a fungus in a muck heap, chambers for
men, horses, oxen, and swine, cleansed and uncleansed, all contiguous to one another,
stocked with men, a great grease spot, redolent of manures and buttermilk, under a high state
of cultivation being manured with the hearts and brains of men, as if you were to raise
your potatoes in the churchyard. Such is a model farm.
No, no, if the fairest features of the landscape are to be named after men, let them be the
noblest and worthiest men alone. Let our lakes receive as true names at least as the Icarian
Sea, where still the shore a brave attempt resounds.
Goose-pond of small extent is on my way to Flint's. Fairhaven, an expanse of Concord
River, said to contain some seventy acres, is a mile southwest, and White-pond, of about
forty acres, is a mile and a half beyond Fairhaven. This is my lake country. These, with Concord
River, are my water privileges, and night and day, year in, year out, they grind such
grist as I carry to them.
Since the woodcutters and the railroad I myself have profaned Walden. Perhaps the most attractive,
if not the most beautiful of all our lakes, the gem of the woods, is White-pond, poor
derived from the remarkable purity of its waters or the color of its sands. In these,
as in other respects, however, it is a lesser twin of Walden. They are so much alike that
you would say they must be connected underground. It has the same stony shore, and its waters
are of the same hue. As at Walden, in sultry dog-day weather, looking down through the
woods on some of its bays, which are not so deep, but that the reflection from the bottom
tinges them, its waters are of a misty bluish-green or glaucus color. Many years since I used
to go there to collect the sand by cartloads, to make sand paper with, and I have continued
to visit it ever since.
One who frequents it proposes to call it Virid Lake. Perhaps it might be called Yellow Pine
Lake, from the following circumstance. About fifteen years ago you could see the top of
a pitch pine, of the kind called Yellow Pine hereabouts, though it is not a distinct species,
projecting above this surface in deep water, many rods from the shore. It was even supposed
by some that the pond had sunk, and this was one of the primitive forest that formerly
stood there. I find that even so long ago, as 1792, in a topographical description of
the town of Concord, by one of its citizens, in the Collections of the Massachusetts Historical
Society, the author, after speaking of Walden and White Ponds, adds,
In the middle of the latter may be seen, when the water is very low, a tree, which appears
as if it grew in the place where it now stands. Although the roots are fifty feet below the
surface of the water, the top of this tree is broken off, and at the place measures fourteen
inches in diameter. In the spring of 49 I talked with a man who lives nearest the pond
in Sudbury, who told me that it was he who got out this tree ten or fifteen years before.
As near as he could remember it stood twelve or fifteen rods from the shore where the water
was thirty or forty feet deep. It was in the winter, and he had been getting out ice in
the afternoon, and had resolved that in the afternoon, with the aid of his neighbours,
he would take out the old yellow pine. He sawed a channel in the ice toward the shore
and hauled it over and along and out on to the ice with oxen. But before he had gone
far in his work he was surprised to find that it was wrong end upward, with the stumps of
the small end firmly fastened in the sandy bottom. It was about a foot in diameter at
the big end, and he had expected to get a good saw log, but it was so rotten as to be
fit only for fuel, if for that. He had some of it in his shed then. There were marks of
an axe and of woodpeckers on the butt. He thought that it might have been a dead tree
on the shore, but was finally blown over into the pond, and after the top had been
waterlogged, while the butt end was still dry and light, had drifted out and sunk wrong
end up. His father, eighty years old, could not remember when it was not there. Several
pretty large logs may still be seen lying on the bottom, where, owing to the undulation
of the surface, they look like huge water-snakes in motion. This pond has rarely been profaned
by a boat, for there is little in it to tempt a fisherman. Instead of the white lily, which
requires mud, or the common sweet flag, the blue flag, Iris versicolor, grows thinly
in the pure water, rising from the stony bottom all around the shore, where it is visited
by hummingbirds in June, and the color both of its bluish blades and its flowers, and
especially their reflections, is in singular harmony with the glaucus water. White pond
and Walden are great crystals on the surface of the earth, lakes of light. If they were
off by slaves, like precious stones, to adorn the heads of emperors, but being liquid and
ample, and secured to us and our successors forever, we disregard them, and run after
the diamond of Koh-i-Noor. They are too pure to have a market value. They contain no muck.
How much more beautiful than our lives! How much more transparent than our characters
are they! We never learned meanness of them. How much fairer than the pool before the farmer's
door, in which his ducks swim! Hither the clean wild ducks come. Nature's beauty is
nature has no human inhabitant who appreciates her. The birds with their plumage and their
notes are in harmony with the flowers. But what youth or maiden conspires with the wild
luxuriant beauty of nature? She flourishes most alone, far from the towns where they
reside. Talk of heaven! You disgrace earth!